.TH SYSTEMD-RC 1 "December 2025" "QuasarFoks" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
systemd-rc \- systemd-compatible CLI shims for non-systemd init systems
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B systemd-rc
.RB [ install ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBsystemd-rc\fR provides drop-in replacements for common \fBsystemd\fR command-line tools
(\fBsystemctl\fR, \fBloginctl\fR, \fBjournalctl\fR) that translate systemd-style invocations
into native commands for alternative init systems: OpenRC, runit, dinit, and s6.

Its purpose is to maintain compatibility with software and scripts that expect \fBsystemctl\fR,
without requiring the \fBsystemd\fR suite.
.SH INSTALLATION
From source:
.PP
.RS
.nf
git clone https://github.com/QuasarFoks/systemd-rc
cd systemd-rc
sudo ./install
.fi
.RE

Installs binaries to \fB/usr/local/bin/\fR.
.SH COMPONENTS
.SS systemctl
Emulates essential \fBsystemctl\fR functionality for service management.

Supported commands:
.TP
\fBstart\fR, \fBstop\fR, \fBrestart\fR, \fBreload\fR, \fBstatus\fR
Control services via native init (e.g., \fBrc-service\fR).
.TP
\fBenable\fR, \fBdisable\fR
Manage boot-time activation (e.g., \fBrc-update\fR).
.TP
\fBis-enabled\fR
Check if a unit is enabled.
.TP
\fBlist-units\fR, \fBlist-unit-files\fR
List active units and installed unit files.
.TP
\fB--now\fR
Immediately start/stop service after enable/disable.
.TP
\fB--user\fR
Manage per-user services (via \fB~/.local/share/openrc/\fR on OpenRC).
.TP
System commands: \fBhalt\fR, \fBpoweroff\fR, \fBreboot\fR, \fBsuspend\fR, \fBhibernate\fR
Forwarded to system utilities or \fBloginctl\fR (via elogind).

Examples:
.PP
.RS
.nf
systemctl --now enable sshd
systemctl --user start myapp
systemctl is-enabled nginx
.fi
.RE

.SS loginctl
Minimal wrapper for elogind-compatible session control:
.RS
.TP
\fBsuspend\fR, \fBhibernate\fR
Executes \fBloginctl suspend\fR / \fBhibernate\fR (requires \fBelogind\fR).
.RE

.SS journalctl
Text-based log reader over syslog:
.RS
.TP
\fBjournalctl -u <service>\fR
Filters logs by service name (searches \fB/var/log/messages\fR or equivalent).
.TP
No arguments → shows last 100 log lines.
.RE
.SH DEPENDENCIES
For full functionality, the following are required:
.RS
.TP
\(bu A supported init system: OpenRC, runit, dinit, s6, or freebsd-init
.TP
\(bu \fBelogind\fR (for suspend/hibernate and user sessions)
.TP
\(bu D-Bus and polkit
.RE
.SH AUTHOR
QuasarFoks — https://github.com/QuasarFoks/systemd-rc
.SH LICENSE
GNU/GPLv3
